Use collaboration mode when the destination matters, but the route needs repeated human judgment.
Both sides stay active.
The AI proposes, transforms, or checks; the human selects, redirects, and supplies context the system cannot infer.
Collaboration works best around a shared artifact.
Edit the actual brief, code path, model, or storyboard.
A concrete artifact turns taste into visible decisions and prevents the conversation from becoming an abstract stream of suggestions.
Work in short loops.
Ask for one meaningful change, inspect the result, and state what improved or failed.
The next instruction should update the artifact and the acceptance criteria, not restart the whole task from a blank prompt.
This mode is powerful for writing, design, diagnosis, planning, and code review because quality emerges through contrast.
The AI can generate options quickly, but the human decides which tradeoff belongs in the final result.
The common failure is invisible convergence.
The conversation feels productive, yet nobody can say what “done” means.
Keep a small scorecard: audience, purpose, constraints, must-keep facts, and the test that determines whether the artifact is acceptable.
Collaboration ends when the next steps become mechanical and checkable.
At that point, package the remaining work for delegation.
If the artifact still has competing directions, stay in collaboration or move briefly into exploration.
First, Collaborate when judgment improves every iteration.
Second, Share a live artifact instead of abstract chat.
Third, Keep acceptance criteria visible.